---
date: 2019-12-23 13:10:39 +0000
title: "IndieWeb"
url: "/indieweb"
tags:
    - IndyWeb
    - Microformats
    - Feeds
    - RSS
---

This blog, and many of my websites, take advantage of some of the
microformat features available in the
[IndieWeb](https://indieweb.org/) - a system of user-centric
services & formats to wrest some identity controls back from the
hands of the corporate web. Authentication, commenting,
subscriptions, notifications, and more are all made available by
wrangling existing microformats and wrapping some services.

If you use some of the larger web publishing software options, you
probably have IndieWeb support available either built-in, or via
plugins. In particular, I'd recommend checking out Webmentions as
an alternative or supplement to your commenting system. It allows
individuals to write their own blog posts or articles in response
to your own and then send your system a "mention" that notifies
the sites of the relationship. They're a bit like the old
"pingbacks" but in a less terrible way.

This site is now set up to receive webmentions (theoretically). So
if you do write something and want to reference me, give it
a shot.

To be honest, a lot of the patchwork services that make up
IndieWeb implementations is pretty new and not well set up for new
users. I get quickly eye-glazed looking at some of the internals.
IndieAuth is extremely simple, but Webmentions is a pain involving
4 different service types working in tandem. The work is good and
important, though, and I hope it continues to gain popularity.


<!--  vim: set shiftwidth=4 tabstop=4 expandtab: -->
