---
url: "/morse"
date: 2014-10-12T00:00:00Z
excerpt: Wearable devices should look to the past for input inspiration. MORSE code
  holds the key.
title: Morse
tags:
  - ui
---

{{< figure src="https://labs.tomasino.org/assets/images/morse.png" alt="Wearable Devices">}}

With wearable devices on the rise, small screen and no-screen user experience
is a hot topic. We've been witnessing powerhouses in industrial and technical
design take on the problem over the last two years, but the market's response
continues to be lackluster. What is it about this format is holding us back?

On the one hand, some argue that the limited screen size means we can only show
very little information at a time. It's tantamount to wearing hundreds of
dollars of technology for what amounts to a status-bar. Some tech enthusiasts
make the plunge readily, but the price and limited offerings are clearly a
barrier to most. Most recently Apple made a wild attempt to drive new use cases
into their release by spelling out oddball new interactions. Their idea, it
seems, is to overwhelm their audience with these nonsensical uses until they
overlook the fact that the device is no more powerful than a fitbit glued to a
swatch.

I empathize with that stance. Small screens do have innate problems finding
useful interactions. Still, the cell phone had a similar issue as well before
industry rose to meet the challenge. How long ago was it when playing a game
with a friend required being face-to-face, or at least on a desktop? The
immediacy of our interactions blended to meet the challenge of the interface
quickly as ingenuity spread virally across the medium. That's why I believe the
real challenge to wearables is not in the size of their screen, but rather in
the size of their input.

RSVP, or [rapid serial visual presentation](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i5fmIDdVN5M),
gives users an alternate way of taking in text that is at once futuristic and
suddenly familiar. By flashing one word quickly in place of another, our eyes
pick up the flow of a sentence, paragraph, and so on automatically but without
wasting all the time tracking from one place on a screen to another. RSVP has
been around for years, but gained internet fame when [Spritz](https://spritzinc.com)
introduced their demo a few months ago. Already their technology has found its
way into smart watches, handheld applications and web plugins. Familiarity and
ease-of-use combine quickly before our eyes as one of the key challenges of the
small screen is tackled.

What then of input, though? Where are our tiny keyboards? Microsoft [is
trying](https://research.microsoft.com/en-us/um/redmond/projects/analogkeyboard/)
pretty much anything they can think of at this point. We've had incredibly
smart folks working on how to turn handwriting into text since the 80s (and
maybe earlier). Will this finally be the push that makes it happen? Perhaps
we'll see a new type of keyboard emerge that meshes the all-popular Swipe with
our small interfaces. One thing is abundantly clear. QWERTY is not getting it done.

We should not expect to see a keyboard interface as we know it on our watches
or goggles. The challenge on mobile phones was enough to take us through the
world of T9 and other predictive text implementations and out again into the
world of quick thumbs. I really can't say where we're going to end up with any
certainty, but there's one part of the puzzle I find incredibly frustrating.
Our best and brightest seem to feel that introducing a new interface or even a
comepletely new input style is not a big deal for end users, and yet they
ignore altogether one alternate input method that we've been using successfully
for over a hundred years. [Morse Code](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Morse_code).

Dots and dashes. Tap and longer tap. The method is there, easy to use, and
blindingly fast with the meagerest of
[practice](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=M_icJLmsFNU). So maybe it's a bit
more intimidating than writing out each letter with your fingernail, but
remember we don't need to listen to it anymore, just input. The small screen
and RSVP style feedback can show us the results in plain text. We just need to
be able to put our thoughts down quickly, and without distractions. You don't
even need to look at your screen to use morse code. Does it need work? Likely.
I wouldn't want to put the same HAM radio style shortcuts and rigamarole into a
consumer level interface. How about our smart friends at Samsung, Sony, Apple
and so on task a few of their brilliant minds with making Morse for the Masses.
