---
date: 2025-02-05 09:45:19 +0000
title: "The Role of Pharma Marketing in AI"
draft: true
url: "/the-role-of-pharma-marketing-in-ai"
og_image: "/assets/images/pharma-marketing-in-ai-og.png"
tags:
  - advertising
  - GPT
  - LLM
  - marketing
  - seo
---

The search engine has been the de facto method of online discovery since before
the web was fully established.
[Archie](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Archie_(search_engine)) helped us search
FTP, and [Veronica](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Veronica_(search_engine))
spidered through Gopher to pave the way for 1994's first full-text web search,
[WebCrawler](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WebCrawler). It wasn't until the late
nineties when the algorithmic searches of
[AltaVista](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AltaVista),
[Lycos](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lycos), and
[Excite](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Excite_(web_portal)) really popularized
their use over [blogrolls](https://blogroll.org/what-are-blogrolls/) and [web
directories](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Web_directory). By the time Google
came on the scene with PageRank their trajectory was set.

For over 20 years the model has persisted. Improve rankings, improve search, and
further entrench yourself at the heart of the web experience. It is this central
position in experience that drives the Google revenue engine. Advertisers pay
Google to reach customers in search because that's where the customers are.
Marketing teams build their sites with structures and content decisions
specifically geared toward search engines. We pay attention to how they rank us,
what technical rules they've changed from era to era, and we react when they
flag issues--not in our sites, but in how those sites are crawled.

The landscape of search is now shifting dramatically and in real time.

The advent of the consumer AI age is changing how we engage with the web. Some
bring their questions directly to a large language model (LLM) like ChatGPT,
avoiding the web search entirely. Natural language processing (NLP) and
personalization of these chat experiences means the user can ask questions and
then ask follow up questions with the same remembered context. They don't need
to format their queries to suit the engine. The model can adapt to them instead.

Others may still use a search engine like Google, but whereas the page list was
once the goal, now there are AI summaries right at the top. Why scroll down and
click when the information is right there?

These summaries, and the results we see from web-capable LLMs like ChatGPT, are
generated content and curation being performed by the models. In the case of the
search results summaries, these are very small, weak models, querying just the
top results in the search and summarizing. They have very little to guide the
model's *algorithmic reasoning* and might present untrustworthy sources just as
much as trustworthy ones. The larger models have some guidelines baked into
them, not at the AI model level itself, but wrapping it. Querying for health
information online will result in specific sites being searched, citing them.

{{< figure src="/assets/images/chatgpt-common-cold.png" alt="ChatGPT searching for treatments to the common cold" >}}

This type of curation is fragile, though, and many searches can slip through the
cracks if phrased in the wrong way. Just like simple search summaries, it is
common to see information from sites like reddit make their way into your result
data, often to comical (or dangerous) results.

SEO Challenges, Ethical considerations

> In summary, AI is transforming search engines from simple tools for retrieving
information into sophisticated systems that understand user intent, personalize
experiences, and adapt to new forms of interaction. This evolution is making the
web experience more intuitive and efficient, but it also requires ongoing
attention to ethical considerations and user privacy<sup>1</sup>.

<!--  vim: set shiftwidth=4 tabstop=4 tw=80 expandtab: -->
