---
url: "/walking-the-design-development-line"
date: 2011-02-24T00:00:00Z
excerpt: Discussing the benefits of blending knowledge of development and design.
tags:
  - augmented reality
  - collaboration
  - communication
  - design
  - development
  - papervision-3d
title: Walking the design / development line
---

<img width="500" height="383" layout="responsive" src="https://labs.tomasino.org/assets/images/design-development.png" alt="Design vs Development"></img>

A friend recently asked me a really good question. He asked, "How much
code should a designer know?" It's a common question and it doesn't have
a standard answer. People have widely different opinions on what's
useful. If you're a one-paragraph blog post reader, then know that my
stance is that a designer should know enough code as is helpful and fun
for her, but she (and especially her art director) should know a lot
more *about* code.

For those of you still reading, what I mean by knowing about code is
having a familiarity with what is difficult and what is easy for your
developers. It also means having the conversations and engaging them
about what new things are possible and at the edge of their talents.
Innovation often takes a long time to reach back to design because
developers are busy playing with tools and techniques in their own
little sandbox and the rest of the world is blissfully unaware.

Take [Papervision 3D][], for instance. Way back in 2006, a developer
named [Carlos Ulloa Matesanz][] started playing around with matrix
transformations on MovieClips to get them to look 3D. He didn't really
have any application and it was just an innocent lab project, like a lot
of these here. It took opening it up to a community and getting fresh
eyes into the mix to lead us into the 3D experiences we have in Flash
today. The [Augmented Reality Toolkit][] wouldn't exist if it weren't
for collaboration.

It's the same story for many of the coolest advances we have, and it's
everyone's job to encourage an environment where that's possible. For
the purposes of this article though, and to answer my friend's question,
it is incredibly important for designers to reach out to developers and
show an interest in new toys. Design always exists within constraints
and the most brilliant and successful designs are those that buck up
against the edges of those constraints. Just as developers need to
continually hone their skills and stay up on the latest technology, so
to do designers need to stay abreast of what's happening in development,
and specifically with their development team. The more integrated the
two become, the more powerful and elegant the executions. Siloing helps
no one.

So if you're a designer looking to learn a scripting language, more
power to you. More skills are always helpful, and that little bit you
know can help you learn the words necessary to talk to your developers.
Likewise, developers should make it a point to learn *about* design,
even if they can't draw or layout an interface. Know how to communicate
and what's important to the other person. Communication is fundamental
to collaboration, and collaboration is fundamental to success.


  [Papervision 3D]: //blog.papervision3d.org/ "Papervison 3D"
  [Carlos Ulloa Matesanz]: //noventaynueve.wordpress.com/
    "Carlos Ulloa Matesanz"
  [Augmented Reality Toolkit]: //www.hitl.washington.edu/artoolkit/
    "ARToolkit"
